---
title: "Dynamic super-overridable methods in Ruby"
comments: true
tags:
  - Ruby
  - Metaprogramming
---

When you want to override methods defined by a library, `super` is more convenient than `alias_method`:

``` ruby
class Post < SomeORM
  attributes :title, :body

  def title
    super || "No title"
  end
end
```

But as these things are commonly implemented, you need to use `alias_method` (or Rails' `alias_method_chain`) instead, which is less convenient:

``` ruby
class Post
  attributes :title, :body

  alias_method :old_title, :title

  def title
    old_title || "No title"
  end
end
```

I would encourage library writers to make their dynamically defined methods `super`-overridable whenever possible; this post explains how.


## The problem

The common implementation uses `define_method` straight on your own class:

``` ruby
class SomeORM
  def self.attributes(*names)
    names.each do |name|
      define_method(name) do
        # Stuff
      end
    end
  end
end
```

The library puts the method right in your class; right in `Post`. So if you define your own method by the same name in `Post`, you completely replace that old method, with no way to reach it. Thus you need `alias_method`.


## The solution

But if the library could instead put the method further up the inheritance chain, we could define our own method and just call `super`.

So what's further up the inheritance chain? The `SomeORM` superclass of course, and its chain of superclasses. But we can't define methods there, or those methods would be available to every `SomeORM` subclass, not just `Post`.

What else is further up the inheritance chain? Modules.

Say we have this Ruby class:

``` ruby
class Post < SomeORM
  include SomeModule
end
```

The (slightly simplified) inheritance chain would then be `[Post, SomeModule, SomeORM, Object]`. Included modules go between the class itself and its parent class, and `super` will look in those modules before it gets to the parent class.

So we simply create a module, define methods on that, and include it:

``` ruby
class SomeORM
  def self.attributes(*names)
    mod = Module.new
    include mod

    names.each do |name|
      mod.module_eval do
        define_method(name) do
          # Stuff
        end
      end
    end
  end
end
```

That's all it takes.


## Polishing the inheritance chain

What does the inheritance chain look like now? Something along the lines of `[Post, #<Module:0x007fa0fea7fcf0>, SomeORM, Object]`.

We defined an anonymous module, which works fine but could be confusing in a later debugging session.

Also, the current implementation will create a separate module for each `attributes` declaration. If you define ten attributes each on their own line, you'll add ten modules to the inheritance chain.

While this works, it makes for a messier inheritance chain.

We can solve both these issues in one fell stroke:

``` ruby
class SomeORM
  MODULE_NAME = :DynamicAttributes

  def self.attributes(*names)
    if const_defined?(MODULE_NAME, _search_ancestors = false)
      mod = const_get(MODULE_NAME)
    else
      mod = const_set(MODULE_NAME, Module.new)
      include mod
    end

    names.each do |name|
      mod.module_eval do
        define_method(name) do
          # Stuff
        end
      end
    end
  end
end
```

(I provided [a somewhat different solution](https://github.com/henrik/octopress/blob/321f5b6fee282e8b6c99a828a5dc661d010b583b/source/_posts/2013-07-31-dsom.markdown) earlier; this improved solution is [due to Avdi Grimm](https://gist.github.com/avdi/6123055).)

The added code does a few things. It names the constant `Post::DynamicAttributes`, so now the inheritance chain will be something like `[Post, Post::DynamicAttributes, SomeORM, Object]`.

It checks if `Post::DynamicAttributes` already exists. If it does, it's reused. This means we only add a single module to the inheritance chain even if `Post` declares ten attributes each on their own line.

The second argument in `const_defined?(MODULE_NAME, _search_ancestors = false)` is important, by the way. Say we introduce a `VideoPost` that inherits from `Post`:

``` ruby
class VideoPost < Post
  attribute :timestamp
end
```

Since we passed `false` as the second argument of `const_defined?`, we will not reuse `Post::DynamicAttributes` from the superclass, but will instead get a new `VideoPost::DynamicAttributes` module. This ensures attributes inherit correctly.

You could of course write just `const_defined?(MODULE_NAME, false)` without the `_search_ancestors` local variable. I feel it makes a cryptic argument more obvious, but it *does* trigger an "unused variable" warning in Ruby &lt;2.0 with the `-w` flag.


## Examples in the wild

I've implemented this in [Traco](https://github.com/barsoom/traco/blob/master/lib/traco/translates.rb) and [Minimapper](https://github.com/joakimk/minimapper/commit/e3ebe9d3148a26c51d81ddc03a3cab567a65ba46).

Implementing it in Traco [last December](https://twitter.com/henrik/status/275278555166945281) was inspired by points brought up in [Ruby Rogues episode 80](http://rubyrogues.com/080-rr-practical-metaprogramming-with-steven-harms/), in turn based on the talk ["The Polite Programmer's Guide to Ruby Etiquette"](http://www.confreaks.com/videos/374-rubyconf2010-the-polite-programmer-s-guide-to-ruby-etiquette) by Jim Weirich et al. (which I haven't watched).

I'd love to hear about other libraries that get this right, alternative solutions, or problems with this approach.
